---
description: '2011 Ph.D. in Zoology, University of Hawaii at Manoa'
dateModified: '2016-08-23T19:39:24.203Z'
datePublished: '2016-08-23T19:39:25.321Z'
title: 'CV '
author: []
publisher: {}
via: {}
sourcePath: _posts/2016-08-23-cv.md
hasPage: true
starred: false
url: cv/index.html
_type: Blurb

---
# CV 

### Dowload a copy [here][0]

## Education

2011 **Ph.D. in Zoology, University of Hawaii at Manoa**

Committee: Rob Toonen, Brian Bowen, Steve Karl, Megan Donahue, Shannon Bennett

2005 **B.S. in Biology with Honors, Brown University**

Advisors: Jon Witman and David Rand

## Professional Appointments

2016- **Postdoctoral Research Associate**

Marine Science Center, Northeastern University

2014-16 **Postdoctoral Research Associate, Adjunct Graduate Faculty**

Harte Research Institute, Texas A&M Corpus Christi

2012-14 **Postdoctoral Research Associate**

Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Science, Texas A&M University

2012 **Postdoctoral Scholar, Lecturer**

Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa

## Publications

**Statistics**

**402 Citations**

**18Peer reviewed journal articles and book chapters**

**11 h-index**

In Review **Puritz, J. B.**, Portnoy, D. S., Gold, J. R. Fine-scale partitioning of genomic variation among recruits in an exploited fishery: causes and consequences. _**Scientific Reports**_.

2016 Selkoe, K.A., D'Aloia, C. C., Crandall, E. D., Iacchei, M. I., Liggins, L., **Puritz, J. B.**, von der Heyden, S., Toonen, R. J. A decade of seascape genetics: contributions to basic and applied marine connectivity. _**Marine Ecology Progress Series**_ 554: 1-19\. doi:10.3354/meps11792

_Feature Article_

2015 Portnoy, D. S., **Puritz, J. B.**, Hollenbeck, C. M., Gelsleichter, J., Chapman, D., Gold, J. R. Selection and sex-biased dispersal in a coastal shark: the influence of philopatry on adaptive variation. _**Molecular Ecology**_ 24: 5877--5885\. doi: 10.1111/mec.13441

2015Gold, J. R., Willis, S. C., Renshaw, M. A., Buentello, A., Walker, Jr., H. J., **Puritz, J. B., **Hollenbeck, C. M., Voelker G. Phylogenetic relationships of tropical eastern Pacific snappers (Lutjanidae) inferred from mtDNA sequences. _**Systematics and Biodiversity**_DOI:10.1080/14772000.2015.1078857

2014 **Puritz, J.B.**, Matz, M. V., Toonen, R. J., Weber, J. N., Bolnick, D. I., Bird, C. E. Comment: Demystifying the RAD fad. _**Molecular Ecology**_ 23: 5937--5942\. doi: 10.1111/mec.12965

_2nd Most Accessed Paper for 2014-2015_

_Altmetric Score of 29 (97th percentile of all articles in Molecular Ecology)_

_Ranks in the top 5% of all 2,827,038 articles tracked by Altmetric_

2014 **Puritz, J. B., **Hollenbeck, C. M., Gold, J. R. _dDocent_: a RADseq, variant-calling pipeline designed for population genomics of non-model organisms. _**PeerJ**_ 2:e431

[http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj.431][1]

2014 **Puritz, J. B.**, Renshaw, M. A., Abrego, D., Vega, R. R., Gold, J. R. Reproductive variance of brood dams and sires used in restoration enhancement of spotted seatrout (_Cynoscion nebulosus_) in Texas bays and estuaries. _**North American Journal of Aquaculture**_76:407--414

2013 Toonen, R. J., **Puritz, J. B., **Forsman, Z.H., Whitney, J. L., Fernandez-Silva, I., Andrews, K. A., Bird, C. E. ezRAD: A Simplified Method for Genomic Genotyping in Non-Model Organisms. _**PeerJ** 1:e203 _[http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj.203][2]

_Featured Article for week of Nov. 19, 2013_

_Covered by KIITV News ([http://goo.gl/Pn5JGa][3])_

_Over 9,456 total views and downloads_

2013 Keever, C., **Puritz, J. B., **Addison, J. A., Byrne, M., Grosberg, R. K., Toonen R. J., Hart, M.W. Shallow gene pools in the high intertidal: Extreme loss of genetic diversity in viviparous sea stars (Parvulastra). _**Biology Letters**_9:20130551 doi:10.1098/rsbl.2013.0551

_Covered by Discovery News ([http://goo.gl/odHxuX][4])_

_One of the "10 Sexiest Stories of 2013" by Discovery News ([http://goo.gl/JFRSWI][5])_

2013 Andrews, K. R., Perrin, W. F., Oremus, M. Karczmarski, L., Bowen, B. W., **Puritz, J. B.**, Toonen, R. J. The evolving male: spinner dolphin (_Stenella longirostris_) ecotypes are divergent at Y chromosome but not mtDNA or autosomal markers. _**Molecular Ecology**_ 22: 2408-2423

2013 Barbosa, S., Klaten, S., **Puritz, J. B., **Toonen, R. J., Byrne, M. Very fine scale population genetic structure of sympatric asterinid sea stars with benthic and pelagic larvae: influence of mating system and dispersal potential. _**Biological Journal of the Linnean Society**_108: 821-833

2013 **Puritz, J. B**. and Toonen, R. J. Next-generation sequencing for high-throughput molecular ecology: a step-by-step protocol for targeted multilocus genotyping by pyrosequencing. Chapter in _**Methods in Molecular Biology: Microsatellites**_. Volume Editor: Kantartzi, S. K. Pages 89-99

2012 **Puritz, J. B., **Keever, C. C., Addison, J. A., Byrne, M. Hart, M. W, Grosberg, R. K., Toonen, R. J. Extraordinarily rapid life history divergence between _Cryptasterina _sea star species. _**Proc. R. Soc. B**_**.** 279: 3914-3922

_Covered by Science/AAAS News ([http://goo.gl/aotxmY][6])_

_Covered by NBC News ([http://goo.gl/l9YbMs][7])_

_Covered by Scientific American ([http://goo.gl/QBVZib][8])_

_Over 8,503 total downloads, Altmetric score of 46 (98th percentile)_

2012 **Puritz, J. B**., Addison, J. A., Toonen, R. J. Next-Generation Phylogeography: the application of targeted next-generation sequencing of non-model organisms. _**PLoS One**7(3):_ e34241\. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034241

_Over 9,017 article views_

2011 **Puritz, J. B. **and Toonen, R. J. Coastal Pollution Limits Pelagic Larval Dispersal. _**Nature Communications**_2:228

_Covered by Discovery News ([http://goo.gl/g3QMrl][9])_

_8th most downloaded paper on Nat Comm Mar 2011_

2011 Toonen, R. J., Andrews, K. R., Baums, I. B., Bird, C. E., Concepcion, G. T., Daly-Engel, T. S., J. Eble, A. Faucci, M. Gaither, M. Iacchei**, J. Puritz**, J. Schultz, D. Skillings, M. Timmers & B. Bowen. Defining boundaries for ecosystem-based management: A multispecies case study of marine connectivity across the Hawaiian Archipelago. _**Journal of Marine Biology**_ DOI: 10.1155/2011/460173

2009 Keever, C. C., Sunday, J., **Puritz, J. B., **Addison, J. A., Toonen, R. J., Grosberg, R. K., Hart, M. W. Discordant Distributions of Populations and Genetic Variation in a Sea Star with High Dispersal Potential._**Evolution**_ 63: 3214-3227

2008 Haney, R. A., Dionne, M., **Puritz, J. B., **Rand, D. M. The Comparative Phylogeography of East Coast Estuarine Fishes in Formerly Glaciated Sites: Persistence versus Recolonization in _Cyprinodon variegatus ovinus _and _Fundulus heteroclitus macrolepidotus. **Journal of Heredity**_100: 284-296

2005 Walker, A. N., Bush, P., Puritz, J., Wilson, T., Chang, E. S., Miller, T., Holloway, K., Horst, M. N. Bioaccumulation and Metabolic Effects of the Endocrine Disruptor Methoprene in the Lobster, _Homarus americanus_._**Integrative and Comparative Biology**_45: 118-126

**Grants Awarded**

2016 **Harte Research Institute Staff Innovations Grant (Declined) $5,000**

Collaborative proposal to investigate evolutionary impacts of barotrauma

in red snapper

2015**Texas Research Development Fund Program $20,000**

Impacts of sewage effluent on genomic diversity and connectivity of

marine intertidal communities

2011**NSF East Asian Pacific Science Institute Fellowship $8,000**

Fellowship for two months of research at the University of Sydney

2011**University of Hawaii Graduate Student Organization $750**

Travel Grant for 2011 Annual Meeting of the Western Society of Naturalists

2010**University of Hawaii Graduate Student Organization $900**

Travel Grant for 2010 Benthic Ecology Meeting

2009**University of Hawaii Graduate Student Organization $750**

Research grant for sample collection trip to California

2008**The Charles H. and Margaret B. Edmondson Research Fund $1,500**

Research on the population connectivity of _Linckia multifora_

2007**Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation Biology Travel Grant $750**

Travel Grant for 2007 Annual Meeting of the Western Society of Naturalists

2007**University of Hawaii Arts and Sciences Advisory Council Award $3,000**

Research expedition to the Chagos Archipelago

**RESEARCH EXPERIENCE**

2016- **Postdoctoral Researcher, Marine Science Center, Northeastern University**

Under supervision of Dr. Kathleen Lotterhos

2012-16 **Postdoctoral Researcher, Harte Research Institute, Texas A&M Corpus Christi**

Under supervision of Dr. John Gold (2012-14, Wildlife and Fisheries, Texas A&M)

2012 **Postdoctoral Researcher, Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology**

Under supervision of Dr. Robert Toonen and Dr. Chris Bird

2007-11 **Research Assistant, Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology**

Under supervision of Dr. Robert Toonen

2008 **Field Assistant, Diego Garcia- Chagos Archipelago**

Under supervision of Dr. Robert Toonen

2007 **Field Assistant, NOAA R/V Hi'ialakai, NWHI**

Under supervision of Dr. Robert Toonen

2005-06 **Research Assistant, HPCSU**

Under supervision of Dr. Larry Basch

2005 **Senior Thesis Research, Brown University**

Under supervision of Dr. David Rand

2004 **Hughes Fellowship Researcher/Intern, Brown University**

Under supervision of Dr. Jon Witman

2003 **Research Intern, Darling Marine Center, University of Maine**

Under supervision of Dr. Mike Horst

**TEACHING EXPERIENCE**

2016**Invited Faculty, Winter School 2016, ETH Zürich, Switzerland**

Bioinformatics for Adaptation Genomics: Adaptation genomics in the realm of Next-Generation Sequencing data analysis

§ Funded by Adaptation to a Changing Environment initiative, ETH Zürich,Switzerland

§ Responsible for whole day workshop on "Extracting SNP data from NGS sequencing"

2015**Invited Faculty, Nha Trang University, Vietnam**

Training workshop for Next Generation Sequencing

§ Funded by the project "Building a Mekong River genetic biodiversity research network" in the PEER program funded by USAID in the process of project implementation, NTU partnered with Old Dominion, and Texas A & M University Corpus Christi.

§ Responsible for multiple day workshop on RADseq Bioinformatics

2015**Invited Faculty, Winter School 2015, ETH Zürich, Switzerland**

Bioinformatics for Adaptation Genomics: Adaptation genomics in the realm of

Next-Generation Sequencing data analysis

\* Funded by the European Science Foundation and the Adaptation to a Changing Environment initiative, ETH Zürich,Switzerland

\* Responsible for whole day workshop on "Extracting SNP data from NGS sequencing"

2014**Invited Faculty, De LaSalle University, Manila, Philippines**

Pacific Advanced Science Institute (PacASI) sponsored workshop: "Introduction to

Genome Data Analysis: Assembly, Annotation, and Application."

\* PacASI is a partnership between the Center for Natural Science and Ecological Research at De La Salle University and the National Science Foundation Partnerships for Enhanced Engagement in Research.

\* Responsible for several lectures and hands on workshops designed for international students' first engagement with genome scale data.

2013**Invited Faculty, Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology**

29th Annual Edwin W. Pauley Summer Program: "Advancing tools for biodiversity

studies: Genomics and bioinformatics of cnidarians with a focus on corals"

\* Responsible for developing and overseeing student research projects and for a workshop on RAD Sequencing

2012**Lecturer, University of Hawaii at Manoa**

Instructor of record for Biology 404: Advanced Topics in Marine Biology

\* Responsible for course development, administration, and lectures for the capstone class for seniors majoring in Marine Biology.

2007 **Teaching Assistant, Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology**

Under supervision of Dr. Brian Bowen

Recent Advances in Conservation Genetics Workshop

\* American Genetic Association, Laboratory of Genomic Diversity of the National Cancer Institute, and The Smithsonian Institution's Conservation & Research Center's course hosted at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology

2006 **Teaching Assistant, University of Hawaii at Manoa**

Invertebrate Zoology under supervision of Dr. Julie Brock

2005 **Teaching Assistant, Brown University**

Principles of Ecology (BI42) under supervision of Dr. Jon Witman

2005 **Teaching Assistant, Brown University**

Invertebrate Zoology (BI41) under supervision of Dr. Mark Bertness and Dr. Eric Sanford

## INVITED PRESENTATIONS

2015 **Using next-generation sequencing to examine patterns of coastal genomic diversity**

Department of Biology Seminar- University of Louisiana at Lafayette

2015 **Using next-generation sequencing to examine patterns of coastal genomic diversity**

Marine Science Center Seminar- Northeastern University

2015 **The Seascape Genetics of Coastal Pollution**

Waterscape Genetics- New Perspectives on Connectivity in Fluid Environments Symposium at the International Association of Landscape Ecology World Congress

2013 **Impacts of Coastal Pollution and Life-History on Marine Population Connectivity**

Biological Sciences Seminar- Old Dominion University

2012 **The Impacts of Coastal Pollution on Marine Population Connectivity**

Harte Research Institute Seminar Series- Texas A&M Corpus Christi

2012 **The Impacts of Coastal Pollution on Marine Population Connectivity**

Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences Brown Bag Seminar- Texas A&M University

2009 **"The Frontiers of Conservation Genetics: From Genes to Genomes"** Hanauma Bay Education Program Lecture Series- Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve

## PRESENTATIONS (LAST 6 YEARS)

2016 **Mind the gap: the effects of INDELs and over-splitting on population genetic inference from RAD sequencing**

Puritz, J. B., Portnoy, D. S., Gold, J. R. Evolution.

2016 **Testing the Genomic Impacts of the DWH Oil Spill on Red Snapper**

Puritz, J. B., Portnoy, D. S., Gold, J. R. Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill and Ecosystem Science Conference.

2015 **Variable patterns of genomic diversity in young-of-the-year Red Snapper (**_**Lutjanus campechanus**_**) in the northern Gulf of Mexico**

Puritz, J. B., Portnoy, D. S., Gold, J. R. American Fisheries Society.

2015 **Fishing for selection, but only catching bias: examining library effects in double-digest RAD data in non-model marine species**

Puritz, J. B., Hollenbeck, C. M., Gold, J. R. Plant and Animal Genomes.

2014 **Genomic Studies of Red Snapper (**_**Lutjanus campechanus**_**) in U.S .Waters of the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic Ocean**

Puritz, J. B., Hollenbeck, C. M., Gold, J. R. Evolution.

2013 **Genomic Studies of Red Snapper (**_**Lutjanus campechanus**_**) in U.S .Waters of the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic Ocean**

Puritz, J. B., Hollenbeck, C. M., Gold, J. R. American Fisheries Society.

2012 **Extraordinarily Rapid Life History Divergence between **_**Cryptasterina**_**Sea Star Species**

Puritz, J. B., Keever, C. C., Addison, J. A., Byrne, M. Hart, M. W, Grosberg, R. K., Toonen, R. J. Evolution (1st Joint Congress on Evolutionary Biology).

2011 **Extraordinarily Rapid Life History Divergence between **_**Cryptasterina**_**Sea Star Species**

Puritz, J. B., Keever, C. C., Addison, J. A., Byrne, M. Hart, M. W, Grosberg, R. K., Toonen, R. J. Western Society of Naturalists Annual Meeting.

2011 **Speedy Sea Star Speciation: extraordinarily rapid life history divergence between **_**Cryptasterina**_**sea star species**

Puritz, J. B., Keever, C. C., Addison, J. A., Byrne, M. Hart, M. W, Grosberg, R. K., Toonen, R. J. Evolution of Life of Pacific Islands and Coral Reefs Conference.

2010 **Coastal Pollution Limits Pelagic Larval Dispersal**

Puritz, J. B. Toonen, R. J. Western Society of Naturalists Annual Meeting.

2010 **Parting the Genetic Sea(scape): The alteration of pelagic larval dispersal by coastal pollution**

Puritz, J. B. Toonen, R. J. Evolution.

\* _Covered by ScienceNews. Vol. 179 (2). Pages 18-22 (2011)_

2010 **Limited Dispersal Despite High Dispersal Potential: The Fine Scale Population Structure of **_**Patiria miniata**_**in the Southern California Bight**

Puritz, J. B. Toonen, R. J. Benthic Ecology Meeting.

2010 **Contrasting Population Structure and Phylogeography between Two Sympatric Sea Stars with Differing Life History Strategies**

Puritz, J. B., Keever, C. C., Addison, J. A., Hart, M. W., Grosberg, R. K., Byrne, M. A., Toonen, R. J. SICB.

## PROFESSIONAL SERVICE

2015-16 **HRI Senior Research Staff Steering Committee Member**

Initiated the HRI Staff Innovations Grant Program

2014-15 **Patricia M. Cockett, Master's Thesis Committee Member**

Effects of harvesting on the genetic composition of a crashed Hawaiian fishery

**AWARDS AND HONORS**

2015 **Top 300 Reviewers of Molecular Ecology**

2009,11 **Best Paper Honorable Mention, Albert L. Tester Memorial Symposium**

2005-06 **National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Honorable Mention**

2005 **Honors awarded to senior thesis, Brown University**

2005- **Associate Member of Sigma Xi, Brown University Chapter**

2004 **Hughes Fellowship Recipient, Brown University**

**PUBLIC OUTREACH**

2007- **Scientific Blogger**

Created a blog to document the experience of being an NSF EAPSI fellow in Australia.

\* jbpaustralia2011.wordpress.com

Created a blog to document field research experience aboard the NOAA R/V Hi'ialakai,Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Research cruise in September of 2007\.

\* [https://sites.google.com/site/jpuritz/cruise][10]

\* Google changed this service and formatting for this webpage is no longer correct

2007-**Underwater Photographer**

Photo chosen for "Featured Image" for _PeerJ_ (Nov 2013)

Photo chosen for "Image of the Week" for _Nature Communications_ (March 2011)

Images have appeared in several publications includingNOAA public reports, the Division of Land and Natural Resources of the state of Hawaii outreach posters, and several HIMB and UC Davis press releases.

2010-11 **Participant in the Pacific Symposium for Science and Sustainability**

Judged and moderated a high school science competition

**TRAINING AND CERTIFICATIONS**

2016- **Northeastern University Scientific Diver (AAUS Reciprocity)**

2014-16 **Texas A&M Corpus Christi Scientific Diver (AAUS Reciprocity)**

2005-12 **University of Hawaii Scientific Diver (AAUS Reciprocity)**

2007 **NOAA Advanced Coxswain**

**JOURNALS REFEREED**

_Molecular Ecology Resources Genome Biology and Evolution_

_Proceedings of the Royal Society B Ecology and Evolution Evolution_

_JEMBE MEPS Biological Invasions_

_Molecular Ecology Journal of Heredity Marine Biology_

_BioScience PLoS One Conservation Genetics_

_Conservation Genetics Resources Heredity Transactions of AFS_

_Aquatic Biology Genetica PeerJ_

_PLoS Genetics Axios Biology Letters_

_Nature Protocols Open Science Journal of Fish Biology_

[0]: https://www.dropbox.com/s/hsm7le5qidbra7s/PuritzCV2016.pdf?dl=0 "CV"
[1]: http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj.431
[2]: http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj.203
[3]: http://goo.gl/Pn5JGa
[4]: http://goo.gl/odHxuX
[5]: http://goo.gl/JFRSWI
[6]: http://goo.gl/aotxmY
[7]: http://goo.gl/l9YbMs
[8]: http://goo.gl/QBVZib
[9]: http://goo.gl/g3QMrl
[10]: https://sites.google.com/site/jpuritz/cruise